What is two-phase commit?
- Strategy designed to ensure that either all the databases are updated or none of them
- Database changes required by a transaction are initially stored temporarily by each database.
- The transaction monitor then issues a "pre-commit" command to each database which requires an acknowledgement. 
- If the monitor receives the appropriate response from each database, the monitor issues the "commit" command, which causes all databases to simultaneously make the transaction changes permanent.

What is a database view?
- The result set of a stored query on the data, which the database users can query.
- It is a virtual table computed or collated dynamically from data in the database when access to that view is requested.
- Changes applied to the data in a relevant underlying table are reflected in the data shown in subsequent invocations of the view.

What are advantages of database views over tables?
1 Views can represent a subset of the data contained in a table.
2 Views can join and simplify multiple tables into a single virtual table.
3 Views can act as aggregated tables presenting the calculated results (sum, average etc) as part of the data.
4 Views take very little space to store; the database contains only the definition of a view, not a copy of all the data that it presents.
5 Depending on the SQL engine used, views can provide extra security.

What is the syntax of SQL INSERT operation?
INSERT INTO table_name (column1,column2,...) 
VALUES (value1,value2,..);

What is the syntax of SQL UPDATE operation?
UPDATE table_name
SET column1=value1,column2=value2,...
WHERE some_column=some_value;

What is the syntax of SQL DELETE operation?
DELETE FROM table_name
WHERE some_column=some_value;

How to specify number of x first rows to be returned from SELECT statement?
SELECT TOP x FROM table_name
Not all DBMS support the SELECT TOP clause:
- MySQL: LIMIT x
- Oracle: WHERE ROWNUM <= x

Name SQL wildcard characters.
% - zero or more characters
_ - single character 
[xyz] - sets and ranges of characters to match
[^xyz] - matches only a character NOT specified within the brackets

Give example of IN SQL operator.
SELECT column_name(s)
FROM table_name
WHERE column_name IN (value1,value2,...);

Give example of BETWEEN SQL operator.
SELECT column_name(s)
FROM table_name
WHERE column_name BETWEEN value1 AND value2;

What are the types of SQL Joins?
1 Inner Join
2 Left Join 
3 Right Join
4 Full Join

What is SQL Inner Join?
Returns all rows when there is at least one match in BOTH tables

What is SQL Left (Right) Join?
Return all rows from the left (right) table, and the matched rows from the right (left) table

What is SQL Full Join?
- It combines the results of both left and right outer joins.
- The joined table will contain all records from both tables, and fill in NULLs for missing matches on either side.

What is SQL Union?
- Operator used to combine the result-set of two or more SELECT statements.
- Each SELECT statement within the UNION must have the same number of columns of similar data types in the same order.

Name some SQL constraints.
1 NOT NULL
2 UNIQUE
3 PRIMARY KEY
4 FOREIGN KEY
5 CHECK
6 DEFAULT

Name some SQL aggregate functions.
- avg()
- count()
- first()/last()
- min()/max()

How to use SQL aggregate function in SQL statement?
Use HAVING clause:
SELECT column_name, function(column_name)
FROM table_name
WHERE column_name operator value
GROUP BY column_name
HAVING function(column_name) operator value;

What is SQL GROUP BY statement?
It is used in conjunction with the aggregate functions to group the result-set by one or more columns.
SELECT column_name, funciton(column_name)
FROM table_name
WHERE column_name operator value
GROUP BY column_name;

What is ACID?
- Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability
- Set of properties that guarantee that database transactions are processed reliably. 

What means Atomicity database characteristic?
It requires that each transaction be "all or nothing": if one part of the transaction fails, the entire transaction fails, and the database state is left unchanged. 

What means Consistency database characteristic?
- It ensures that any transaction will bring the database from one valid state to another.
- Any data written to the database must be valid according to all defined rules, including constraints, cascades, triggers, and any combination thereof.

What means Isolation database characteristic?
- It ensures that the concurrent execution of transactions results in a system state that would be obtained if transactions were executed serially
- 4 isolation levels:
1 Read uncommitted
2 Read committed
3 Repeatable read
4 Serializable

What means Durability database characteristic?
It means that once a transaction has been committed, it will remain so, even in the event of power loss, crashes, or errors

What means dirty read?
- It permits to read uncommitted data.
- Can be achieved by just opening an OS file that someone else is writing and reading whatever data happens to be there.
- Data integrity is compromised, foreign keys are violated, and unique constraints are ignored.

What means nonrepeatable read?
It occurs, when during the course of a transaction, a row is retrieved twice and the values within the row differ between reads.

What means phantom read?
It occurs when, in the course of a transaction, two identical queries are executed, and the collection of rows returned by the second query is different from the first.

What are four isolation levels?
1 Read uncommitted
2 Read committed
3 Repeatable read
4 Serializable

What means read uncommitted isolation level?
- Dirty reads are allowed, so one transaction may see not-yet-committed changes made by other transactions.
- Allows dirty reads, not repeatable reads and phantom reads.
- The lowest isolation level.

What means read committed isolation level?
- It keeps write locks until the end of the transaction, but read locks are released as soon as the SELECT operation is performed 
- It guarantees that any data read is committed at the moment it is read.
- Allows not repeatable reads and phantom reads. Doesn't allow dirty reads.

What means repeatable reads isolation level?
- It keeps read and write locks until the end of the transaction. 
- However, range-locks are not managed, so phantom reads can occur.
- Allows phantom reads. Doesn't allow dirty reads and not repeatable reads.

What means serializable isolation level?
- Doesn't allow dirty reads, not repeatable reads nor phantom reads.
- The highest isolation level.